Definition
----------
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) refers to
pulmonary
disease that blocks airflow in the lungs and causes breathing difficulties. Chronic
bronchitis
and
emphysema
are often part of this condition.
Chronic bronchitis is the inflammation of the airways or
bronchial tubes
. This inflammation can create narrowing and excess mucus, blocking airflow. You may develop a long-standing cough, which occurs to clear the mucus from the airways. For bronchitis to be considered chronic, you must have a cough that lasts at least three months of the year for two years.
Emphysema occurs when the linings of the air sacs are damaged and holes develop in the lungs. Once the air becomes trapped in these holes, the lungs slowly increase in size and lose their elasticity. This makes breathing more difficult because the lungs cannot exhale air completely.
Symptoms of COPD may include:
Shortness of breath, especially during physical activity
Chronic cough, often with excess mucus
Recurrent respiratory infections
Wheezing
Tightness in the chest
Cyanosis
, or a blue discoloration of the lips or fingernail beds
Lack of energy
Unintended weight loss
There are many factors that contribute to the development of COPD. The leading cause is tobacco smoking. Others include:
Secondhand smoke
Air pollution
Exposure to harmful dust or chemical fumes in the workplace
In rare cases, non-smokers or children may develop COPD as a result of
alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
(A1AD).  A1AD is a genetic disorder caused by abnormally low levels of a protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin. These patients develop emphysema at the base of the lung.

Diagnosis and Evaluation
------------------------
Your primary care doctor will begin by taking your medical history and asking about symptoms. You will also undergo a physical exam.
If your doctor suspects you are suffering from COPD, the following tests may be performed:
Spirometry: This lung function test involves the use of a machine called a
spirometer
that measures how much air you are able to move by taking a deep breath in and out, and how quickly you are able to do so.
Arterial blood gas analysis: This test measures how much oxygen and carbon dioxide are present in your blood. A high percentage of carbon dioxide in the blood can be a sign of poorly functioning lungs caused by COPD.
Your doctor may also order the following imaging tests:
Chest x-ray:
This exam can help support the diagnosis of COPD by producing images of the lungs to evaluate symptoms of shortness of breath or chronic cough. While a chest x-ray may not show COPD until it is severe, the images may show enlarged lungs, air pockets (
bullae
) or a flattened
diaphragm
. A chest x-ray may also be used to determine if another condition may be causing symptoms similar to COPD.
See the
Safety section
for more information about x-rays.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan:
This exam may be performed to help support the diagnosis of COPD or determine if the disease has worsened. It combines special x-ray equipment with sophisticated computers to produce multiple images or pictures of the inside of the lungs. CT images can identify emphysema better and at an earlier stage than a chest x-ray. They can also identify other changes of COPD such as enlarged arteries in the lungs. CT is sometimes used to measure the extent of emphysema within the lungs. It can also help determine if the symptoms are the result of another disease of the chest.
See the
Safety section
for more information about CT.
