Pulmonary edema: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government
organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Medical Encyclopedia
→
Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary edema is an abnormal buildup of fluid in the lungs. This buildup of fluid leads to shortness of breath.
Causes
Pulmonary edema is often caused by
congestive heart failure
. When the heart is not able to pump efficiently, blood can back up into the blood vessels that take blood through the lungs.
As the pressure in these blood vessels increases, fluid is pushed into the air spaces (alveoli) in the lungs. This fluid reduces normal oxygen movement through the lungs. These two factors combine to cause shortness of breath.
Congestive heart failure that leads to pulmonary edema may be caused by:
Heart attack, or any disease of the heart that weakens or stiffens the heart muscle (
cardiomyopathy
)
Leaking or narrowed heart valves (mitral or aortic valves)
Sudden, severe high blood pressure (hypertension)
Pulmonary edema may also be caused by:
Certain medicines
High altitude exposure
Kidney failure
Narrowed arteries that bring blood to the kidneys
Lung damage caused by burns from poisonous gas inhalation or severe infection
Major injury
Symptoms
Symptoms of pulmonary edema may include:
Coughing up blood or bloody froth
Difficulty breathing when lying down (orthopnea)
Feeling of "air hunger" or "drowning" (This feeling is called "paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea" if it causes you to wake up 1 to 2 hours after falling asleep and struggle to catch your breath.)
Grunting, gurgling, or wheezing sounds with breathing
Problems speaking in full sentences because of shortness of breath
Other symptoms may include:
Anxiety or restlessness
Decrease in level of alertness
Leg or abdominal swelling
Pale skin
Sweating (excessive)
Exams and Tests
The health care provider will perform a thorough physical exam.
The provider will listen to your lungs and heart with a stethoscope to check for:
Abnormal heart sounds
Crackles in your lungs, called rales, which often indicate fluid in the lungs
Increased heart rate (tachycardia)
Rapid breathing (tachypnea)
Other things that may be seen during the exam include:
Leg or abdominal swelling
Abnormalities of your neck veins (which can show that there is too much fluid in your body)
Pale or
blue skin color
(pallor or cyanosis)
Possible tests include:
Blood chemistries
Blood oxygen levels (oximetry or
arterial blood gases
)
Chest x-ray
Complete blood count
(CBC)
Echocardiogram
(ultrasound of the heart) to see if there are problems with the heart muscle
Electrocardiogram
(ECG) to look for signs of a heart attack or problems with the heart rhythm
Treatment
Pulmonary edema is almost always treated in the emergency room or hospital. You may need to be in an intensive care unit (ICU).
Oxygen is given through a face mask or tiny plastic tubes are placed in the nose.
A breathing tube may be placed into the windpipe (trachea) so you can be connected to a breathing machine (ventilator) if you cannot breathe well on your own (only needed in severe cases).
The cause of pulmonary edema should be identified and treated quickly. For example, if a heart attack has caused the condition, it must be treated right away.
Medicines that may be used include:
Diuretics that remove excess fluid from the body
Medicines that strengthen the heart muscle, control the heartbeat, or relieve pressure on the heart
Other medicines when heart failure is not the cause of the pulmonary edema
Outlook (Prognosis)
The outlook depends on the cause. The condition may get better quickly or slowly. Some people may need to use a breathing machine for a long time. If not treated, this condition can be life threatening.
When to Contact a Medical Professional
Go to the emergency room or call 911 or the local emergency number if you have breathing problems.
Prevention
Take all your medicines as directed if you have a disease that can lead to pulmonary edema or a weakened heart muscle.
Following a healthy diet that is low in salt and fat and controlling your other risk factors for heart disease can reduce the risk of developing this condition.
Alternative Names
Lung congestion; Lung water; Pulmonary congestion; Heart failure - pulmonary edema